An atom is a tiny, tiny bit of matter. It’s really hard to imagine how small an atom is. Suppose you could line atoms up in row. It would take 100 million atoms to make a row only 1 centimeter long.

Everything in the world is made of atoms. The chair you are sitting on, the computer you are looking at, the clothes you are wearing, and even your body are all made of atoms.

There are more than 100 kinds of atoms. Each kind of atom belongs to a different element, such as oxygen or iron. An element is the simplest kind of substance there is, made up of only one kind of atom. Oxygen is the element made up of only oxygen atoms. Iron is the element made up of only iron atoms.

DO ATOMS HAVE PARTS?.

All atoms have the same basic parts. Most of the matter in an atom is at its center, which is called the nucleus. The nucleus of nearly all atoms is made of two more parts called protons and neutrons. Protons and neutrons consist of even tinier parts called quarks.

Electrons whirl around the nucleus but at some distance. The distance between electrons and the nucleus means that most of an atom is empty space. Scientists do not think that electrons are made of any more parts.

Each type of atom has a different combination of protons, neutrons, and electrons. The number of protons determines what kind of chemical element the atom is. The difference in number of protons explains why oxygen differs from iron.

WHO DISCOVERED ATOMS?.

Atoms are not a new discovery. Ancient Greeks came up with the idea of atoms around 400 bc. But the ancient Greeks did not understand what atoms were really like. Scientists made many discoveries about the structure and nature of atoms during the 1900s. They used big machines called atom smashers, or particle accelerators, to smash parts of atoms together. Then they studied the pieces. They learned that powerful forces hold each tiny atom together. They learned how to release this power called atomic energy or nuclear energy. They built atomic bombs using this energy. They also built nuclear power plants that use atomic energy to make electricity.

Microsoft ® Encarta ® 2009. © 1993-2008 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

Peek into a clean room with no one in it. There are no pets in the room. There are no plants in the room. It looks like there is nothing alive in the room. The room, however, is swarming with life. Billions of tiny life forms called bacteria cover the tables and chairs and the floor. You can’t see them, but they stick to the windows, they cling to the ceiling, and they float through the air.

Suppose you looked at part of a chair in the room through a microscope. Microscopes magnify bacteria. You would see pale forms moving and bumping into each other like ghosts. These tiny life forms are bacteria. They live everywhere in the world. Billions of them even live inside of you!

WHAT DO BACTERIA LOOK LIKE?.

Bacteria come in three basic shapes. Some are round or shaped like a jellybean. Some are spiral-shaped like a corkscrew. Some are long, like rods.

Each sphere or spiral or rod is called a cell. Animals have millions of cells, but bacteria have only one cell. This single bacterial cell is called a bacterium. An outer wall surrounds the cell and protects it. A substance called DNA floats around inside the cell.

Some bacteria have hairlike parts called flagella. The flagella help the bacteria move around in search of food. Flagella also move bacteria away from things that could harm them.

WHAT DO BACTERIA DO?.

Some bacteria help you. Bacteria in the body help fight off disease and help you digest your food. Some bacteria that live in soil help plants by producing substances plants need. They break down dead plants and animals and animal waste. They make a gas called carbon dioxide from decaying material. Other bacteria help plants take a gas called nitrogen out of the air. Plants need carbon dioxide and nitrogen in order to grow.

Some bacteria can harm you. There are bacteria that cause food poisoning, pneumonia, tuberculosis, and other sicknesses. Some bacteria cause tooth decay. Bacteria can also infect farm animals and wild animals.

Disease-causing bacteria are different from helpful bacteria. You can swallow disease-causing bacteria in unclean food or water. Bacteria that cause infections can get into cuts and sores. Bacteria can get on your hands and go from your hands into your nose, eyes, or mouth. That is why it is so important to wash your hands often.

HOW DO BACTERIA GROW AND SPREAD?.

Most bacteria simply split in two. Bacteria reproduce very rapidly. One bacterial cell can become two in just a few minutes. Two bacteria become four bacteria and then four become eight bacteria. Bacteria keep multiplying this way until there are billions of them.

Different kinds of bacteria must compete for food. This competition keeps bacteria from overrunning Earth.

WHO DISCOVERED BACTERIA?.

No one knew about bacteria until the microscope was invented. Bacteria are so small that they must be magnified at least 500 times their actual size for us to see them.

A Dutch microscope-maker named Antoni van Leeuwenhoek in the 1670s was the first person to see bacteria under a microscope. He saw tiny life forms swimming around in drops of rainwater and in scrapings from his teeth. He called the bacteria “animalcules,” meaning tiny animals.

French scientist Louis Pasteur in the 1800s proved that some bacteria are germs that cause disease. He found that heat kills bacteria. Heating surgical instruments to kill bacteria is called sterilization. Heating milk and other foods to kill bacteria is called pasteurization, a word named for Pasteur.

A German scientist named Robert Koch also made important discoveries about bacteria. He founded a field of science called bacteriology, the study of bacteria.

WHY DO WE STUDY BACTERIA?.

Scientists study bacteria to find out how these tiny life forms behave. Scientists also want to know what diseases bacteria cause. They look for ways to kill disease-causing bacteria.

In the mid-1800s, scientists learned that killing bacteria can stop the spread of some diseases. Doctors learned that sterile surgical instruments and operating rooms help prevent infection after operations. Scientists learned that having clean drinking water and food prevents the spread of deadly diseases such as cholera and typhoid. 

Scientists also learned how to make vaccines that protect against some diseases caused by bacteria. They made vaccines from dead or weakened bacteria or from poisons bacteria produce. For example, a shot of tetanus vaccine protects you from the bacteria that cause tetanus. Tetanus bacteria live in the soil. They can get into even small cuts on your body. Tetanus causes muscles to tighten. It can be deadly.

In the mid-1900s, scientists discovered antibiotics, drugs that kill bacteria. Before antibiotics, many people died from pneumonia and other infections caused by bacteria. Some bacteria have become resistant to antibiotics. The antibiotics no longer kill them. Scientists are working to make new kinds of antibiotics that will kill resistant bacteria.

Microsoft ® Encarta ® 2009. © 1993-2008 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

Take a really deep breath. Feel how your chest gets bigger and bigger. Your chest gets bigger because your lungs are filling up with air. You cannot see air, but air is all around you. You can feel it when the wind blows.

Earth’s atmosphere is made of air. An atmosphere is made up of the gases that surround a planet.

WHAT IS AIR?.

Air is a mixture of several different gases. The main gases in air are nitrogen, oxygen, and argon. Air also contains smaller amounts of hydrogen, carbon dioxide, water vapor, helium, and other gases. Oxygen is the most important gas for animals. Animals must breathe oxygen in order to live.

Carbon dioxide is the most important gas for plants. Plants use carbon dioxide and sunlight to make food. Plants give off oxygen. Animals turn the oxygen back into carbon dioxide when they breathe.

TAKING AIR WITH YOU.

You can go to places where there is no air. There is no air underwater, but you can dive underwater. You can stay underwater a short time just by holding your breath. Air tanks let you stay underwater for a long time. Scuba divers wear tanks on their backs. The tanks are filled with gases that make up air. The divers breathe the gases through hoses.

There is less and less air the higher up you go. People gasp for breath at the tops of tall mountains. Airplanes must carry air. Once the airplane gets up high, air is pumped into the cabin where passengers sit. Astronauts have to take all the air they need with them—there’s no air in space!

Microsoft ® Encarta ® 2009. © 1993-2008 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

Cells.

All plants and animals are made of cells. Most cells are much too small to see. It takes millions of cells, for example, to make just one of your fingers. Some tiny creatures, such as bacteria, are made of only one cell.

If you want to see what a cell looks like, you could use a microscope. Or, you could get an egg. A bird’s egg is actually a single, giant cell. The eggs you eat for breakfast come from chickens.

AN EGG IS A CELL.

An egg is a very big cell. Take a look at an egg that has been broken into a bowl. One of the first things you see is a yellow center. You call this center the yolk. Biologists call it the nucleus of the cell. Almost all cells have a nucleus.

The genes of the cell are in the nucleus. The genes in the chicken egg tell what the bird will look like. The genes tell the cell how to do its work. Different plants and animals have different genes.

The clear, jelly-like stuff around the nucleus is called cytoplasm. Much of the work of the cell goes on in the cytoplasm. This work keeps plants and animals alive.

A chicken egg is a special kind of cell. It has a hard shell to protect the egg. Most cells are much smaller and do not have a hard shell.

WHAT ARE THE KINDS OF ANIMAL CELLS?.

There are many kinds of animal cells. The different parts of your body, such as your muscles, skin, and brain, are made up of different types of cells. The cells perform different functions. Muscle cells help you move. Skin cells keep harmful things from getting into your body. Brain cells allow you to think.

Animal cells come in all sizes. Some are so small that 10,000 of them would be only as wide as a single hair. The ostrich egg is a cell that is as big as a baseball.

WHAT DO ANIMAL CELLS LOOK LIKE?.

Animal cells come in many different shapes. Skin cells are flat. Red blood cells are round like wheels. Muscle cells are long and thin. Nerve cells have long arms and look like octopuses.

Cells have a kind of framework. The framework is called a cytoskeleton. The cytoskeleton gives an animal cell its shape. It holds the insides of the cell in place.

THE INSIDES OF ANIMAL CELLS.

Cells have organs just like you have organs. The organs of a cell are called organelles. Organelles do all the things a cell needs to stay alive and to perform its function in the body.

Each type of organelle has a different job. The nucleus is the organelle that holds the genes. The genes carry a code that tells the cell what to do. Genes tell a cell when to divide.

The cytoplasm contains organelles that do other jobs. Organelles called mitochondria make energy for the cell. Muscle cells have lots of mitochondria because they use a lot of energy. Proteins, chemicals that cells need to survive, get made in organelles called the endoplasmic reticulum and the Golgi apparatus. Lysosomes are small, rounded organelles that act as the cell’s recycling center and garbage disposal.

Animal cells are surrounded by a covering called the cell membrane. The cell membrane lets some materials pass into and out of the cell. It keeps other, harmful materials out.

WHAT DO PLANT CELLS LOOK LIKE?.

Plant cells are square or rectangular in shape. Plant cells have a nucleus and many of the same organelles that animal cells have. In addition, plant cells have a sturdy cell wall that surrounds the cell membrane. Plant cells also have a big bag inside called the central vacuole. The central vacuole stores water and takes up most of the cell. Green plant cells contain small green spheres called chloroplasts.

THE INSIDES OF PLANT CELLS.

Chloroplasts are organelles that absorb sunlight and use its energy to make food for the cell. The job that chloroplasts do is called photosynthesis.

The central vacuole stores water filled with salts, sugars, and other nutrients. The vacuole swells up when it’s full of this water. The full vacuole gives plants sturdy stems and plump leaves and flowers. Without enough water inside, the cells collapse and the plant wilts. In flowers, the material in the vacuole gives the flower its color. The central vacuole also collects plant wastes.

The strong cell wall gives a plant cell its rigid shape. The wall lets the central vacuole swell up without bursting the cell. 

HOW DO CELLS MULTIPLY?.

All cells of living things come from other cells. They come from cells that divide.

There are two steps in cell division for plants and animals. First, the nucleus divides in two. Then, the cytoplasm divides and the cell splits into two cells, each with its own nucleus.

There are two ways a cell can divide. The nucleus of most cells divides by a process called mitosis. Mitosis makes ordinary cells such as skin or blood cells. The two cells produced by mitosis are like identical twins. Each has a full set of genes.

The nucleus of a sex cell divides by a different process called meiosis. Cells produced by meiosis have only a half set of genes. These sex cells, such as sperm and egg cells, can together produce whole new animals. When a sperm fertilizes (combines with) an egg, the new cell has a full set of genes. Half of the genes come from the father’s sperm cell and half from the mother’s egg cell. That’s how babies get genes from both parents.

Microsoft ® Encarta ® 2009. © 1993-2008 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

Chemical Elements.

You and everything around you are made of chemical elements. The elements are sort of like LEGO or Tinkertoy pieces. You can put LEGO or Tinkertoy pieces together to make new things. You can take an object built of LEGO or Tinkertoy pieces apart. When there is nothing more to take apart, you have a pile of LEGO or Tinkertoy pieces. The pieces are different from the original object. You cannot take apart a LEGO or Tinkertoy piece without breaking it.

Materials, or substances, that you cannot take apart are called elements. Elements can link together to make all kinds of materials. The elements oxygen and hydrogen, for instance, together make water. Oxygen and the element carbon together make carbon dioxide, a gas that plants need.

WHY CAN’T YOU TAKE ELEMENTS APART?.

All materials on Earth are made of tiny pieces called atoms. Atoms are much too small to see. Elements are made of only one kind of atom. Compounds are combinations of more than one kind of atom. Water is a compound. Water has two atoms of hydrogen for every one atom of oxygen. You can separate water into hydrogen and oxygen by separating the hydrogen atoms from the oxygen atoms. All compounds can be turned into completely different substances this way. Separating atoms won’t change an element, however, since all its atoms are alike.

WHAT KINDS OF ELEMENTS EXIST?.

There are more than 100 elements. Some elements that you may have heard of include aluminum, lead, mercury, uranium, and helium. Elements have different properties. Some are normally solids, some are gases, and a couple are liquids. Elements look different from each other, they weigh different amounts, and they combine in different ways to make compounds. Scientist list all the elements in a chart called the periodic table. Elements that share a column in the table have similar properties.

Microsoft ® Encarta ® 2009. © 1993-2008 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

Color.

The world is full of beautiful color. You see a violet dress, a blue car, a yellow flower, and a green tree. The colored leaves on trees in autumn mean that winter is coming. All kinds of colors are everywhere.

COLOR COMES FROM LIGHT.

White light, including sunlight and light from a light bulb, is actually made of all the colors of the rainbow. Have you ever seen sunlight that hits a piece of crystal? Rays of blue, purple, orange, yellow, and red seem to shoot out from the crystal in all directions. The crystal spreads the colors of light apart a bit so you can see them separately.

Scientists show the colors of light in a bar called a spectrum. A rainbow is a spectrum. Its colors go from red through orange, yellow, green, blue, indigo, and violet. Violet is purple and indigo is a deep purplish-blue. It’s easy to remember the colors of the spectrum because the first letter of each color makes up a name: Roy G. Biv.

HOW DO WE SEE COLOR?.

White light, such as sunlight or light from a light bulb, lets you see things. Dresses, cars, and all other things we see absorb (soak up) some of the colors of white light. The colors that don’t get absorbed bounce off of things. Red light bounces off a red dress. The dress soaks up other colors. Your eyes see the red light but not the other colors. Your eyes send this message to your brain. Your brain tells you that you are seeing a dress that looks red.

Something very special happens when you see a red dress or green grass. Objects themselves don’t actually have color. What they have is the ability to reflect (bounce back) different types of light. When this reflected light enters your eyes, your brain interprets the different types of light as color. Your eyes and brain work together to translate the different types of light into different colors.

COLORS OF PAINT.

Artists call three special colors the primary colors of paint. These colors are magenta (purplish-pink), yellow, and cyan (light greenish-blue). You can make other colors of paint by mixing the primary colors together. But you cannot mix other colors of paint to make a primary color.

Suppose you want to paint a picture of an apple tree. You can make whatever colors you want to use with just four jars of paint: magenta, yellow, cyan, and white. You mix yellow and cyan to make green paint for the leaves. For the apples, mix magenta and yellow paint to make the color red.

To paint the sky light blue, you must use some white paint. White makes other colors lighter. Mix magenta and cyan to make a deep blue. Then add some white paint to the blue paint until the blue becomes light enough for the sky. White paint mixed with blue or another color is called a tint. A light blue tint will make a color like a clear sky.

If you mix all three colors together you get black paint. You can make a color darker by mixing it with black paint. Colors mixed with black paint are called shades. When you mix black and white together, you get gray.

By mixing together different amounts of magenta, yellow, cyan, and white paint, you can make lots of different colors. Everything you need to make beautiful paintings.

Microsoft ® Encarta ® 2009. © 1993-2008 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

Electricity.

Watch a bolt of lightning flash across the sky. Flip a switch and light up your bedroom. Click the remote and see the TV come on. What do all of these things have in common? Electricity.

WHAT IS ELECTRICITY?.

Electricity is a powerful force of nature. Electricity is everywhere in the universe. Electrical forces hold water, metals, and all other kinds of matter together. You can walk and run because electric signals go through your nerves from your brain to your muscles. The signals tell your muscles where to move.

Electricity makes many machines work. Electricity makes bulbs light up and runs motors in saws, fans, hairdryers, and other appliances. The computer you are using works because of electricity.

WHERE DOES ELECTRICITY COME FROM?.

Electricity starts with atoms. Atoms are tiny bits of matter much too small for you to see. Everything in the universe is made up of atoms.

Atoms have two main parts: a center or nucleus, and electrons that orbit or go around the nucleus. Electricity comes from electrons. You cannot see electrons and you cannot see electricity. You can see what electricity does because of electric charge and electric energy.

WHAT IS ELECTRIC CHARGE?.

Electric charge comes from the parts inside atoms. There are two kinds of electric charge called positive charge and negative charge. Positive charge comes from the nucleus of an atom. Negative charge comes from electrons. Atoms do not normally have any overall charge because their positive and negative charges cancel each other out. Charge comes when electrons move away from an atom.

Positive charge is just the opposite of negative charge. Positive and negative charges pull toward each other. The pull of positive and negative charges makes two kinds of electricity—static electricity and electric current.

WHAT IS STATIC ELECTRICITY?.

Did you ever get a shock after walking across a carpet and touching a metal doorknob? That shock came from static electricity. Huge amounts of static electricity cause lightning.

Electrons that move away from their atoms cause static electricity. You can make static electricity by rubbing certain materials together. Run a plastic comb through your hair. Be sure your hair is clean and dry. Electrons jump from your hair to the comb. This gives the comb a negative electric charge. Your hair loses electrons. This gives your hair a positive electric charge. Hold the comb above your head and watch some of your hairs stand on end. Your hair stands on end because the positive and negative charges are pulling toward one another.

Static electricity also causes lightning. The pull of positive and negative charges between clouds and the ground creates a huge spark. The spark is actually the charges moving very quickly toward each other. Lightning can also be caused by opposite charges inside one cloud, between two clouds, or between clouds and the air.

WHAT MAKES LAMPS LIGHT UP?.

Electric current makes lamps and all other electric devices work. Electric current is actually electrons moving in a big loop.

Something must give the electrons a push to get them moving. Batteries can start electrons flowing. Batteries are a source of electric energy. A battery, two wires, and a light bulb can make an electric circuit. The current starts flowing from the battery through a wire to the light bulb. The other wire carries the electric current back to the battery. If you cut the wire, the electric current stops. Switches on an electric circuit turn the current on and off. This is how a wall switch works to turn lights on and off in your home.

The electric energy in your home does not come from batteries. You plug appliances into electric outlets in your walls. The electric energy in the outlets comes from electric power plants.

HOW DO POWER PLANTS WORK?.

Huge electric power plants generate or make electricity. Steam or falling water in dams make big machines called turbines turn. The turbine drives another machine called an electric generator. The generator makes electricity.

Long power lines carry electricity from power plants to your home. Wires inside your home bring the electric energy to light bulbs, TVs, microwaves, and your computer.

WHO DISCOVERED ELECTRICITY?.

For thousands of years people knew that a material called amber mysteriously pulled on some materials. The ancient Greeks called amber elektron. Scientists in Europe in the 1600s and early 1700s called the materials that amber attracted electrics.

Benjamin Franklin, an American printer, patriot, and inventor, experimented with electricity. He thought lightning and electricity were the same thing. He did a dangerous experiment in the mid-1700s to find out. Franklin flew a kite during a thunderstorm. He attached a metal key to the kite string. An electric charge ran down the wet kite string to the key. The charge made a spark when it hit the key. This showed Franklin that lightning was electricity. He was lucky he was not killed.

Many other scientists have experimented with electricity since Benjamin Franklin. They learned how to make electricity with batteries. They found that electricity would go through wires. An American inventor named Thomas Alva Edison invented many things that use electricity, including the electric light bulb.

Microsoft ® Encarta ® 2009. © 1993-2008 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

Fire.

It cooks our food and makes it taste better. It warms our homes and makes our cars go. Yet it can be hard to control. It can destroy a house or an entire forest. It is fire. Fire is both very useful and very dangerous.

HOW DO FIRES GET STARTED?.

Three things are needed to get a fire going. The first is oxygen, a gas that makes up part of air. The second is fuel to burn. Fuel can be anything that will burn. In a campfire, for instance, the fuel is wood. In most car engines, the fuel is gasoline. 

The third thing necessary to start a fire is heat. The amount of heat it takes to set a fuel on fire is called the kindling temperature or ignition point. Different materials have different kindling temperatures. Paper has a lower kindling temperature than wood. The tip of a match has a very low kindling temperature. Heat caused by the friction of striking a match against a matchbox makes enough heat to set the match on fire.

When a fuel starts to burn, it gives off a flame. Gases from the hot fuel mix with oxygen in the air to make the flame. Fanning a fire brings in more oxygen to feed the flames.

PEOPLE AND FIRE.

Early humans used fire hundreds of thousands of years ago. They used fire to cook food, stay warm, and keep wild animals away. People learned to use fire for light. They made oil lamps and candles. They learned to use fire for making things, such as pottery.

It was hard to start a fire before matches and lighters were invented. Some early people learned to make a fire by rubbing sticks together. The rubbing caused friction. Friction makes heat. When the heat was high enough, a fire would start. It takes a long time to make that much heat from friction. That’s why early people were careful to never let their fires burn out. Later, people learned to rub flint and iron to make sparks that can start fires.

We still use fire to cook and stay warm. We also use fire in factories to make things. We burn coal and oil in power plants to make electricity. We use fire in foundries to melt iron and steel. Fire has always been important to the way human beings live.

FAST AND SLOW BURNS.

Some fuels burn faster than others. Gasoline burns faster than wood. Small pieces of fuel burn faster than big pieces. You can use small twigs called kindling to get a campfire started. You add bigger and bigger pieces once the fire gets started.

FIRE IS DANGEROUS.

A fire that is not in control can cause great destruction. Sometimes lightning can start fires. Lightning is a huge spark of electricity that heats up whatever it hits. Lightning can set dry grasslands or dry forests on fire. Wildfires can destroy lots of land. They can burn down beautiful trees.

Wildfires, however, are part of nature. They can keep a forest or grassland healthy. Grasslands grow better after a fire. Some seeds need fire in order to grow and make new trees. Small fires get rid of kindling such as dead leaves and dead trees. In this way, small fires can keep big fires from starting.

Fire is a major danger in homes. House fires can start in many ways. Grease in a kitchen can catch fire. Electrical wires in walls can overheat. The heat can start a fire inside the wall. Cigarettes cause many fires. A cigarette can fall into a sofa, for example. The sofa can smolder, or burn slowly, for hours before it bursts into flame.

Fires in homes, schools, and offices can give off poisonous gases such as carbon monoxide. This gas has no color, odor, or taste. It can kill people. Burning plastics can also give off deadly gases. Most people who die in fires die from poisonous gases.

FIGHTING FIRES.

When a fire breaks out, the fire department comes in. Firefighters use big hoses to pour water on the fire. Water can put out many types of fires. Firefighters break windows to let out gases. The gases could build up and explode. Firefighters knock holes in walls. They look for hidden places where fire could be burning. Firefighters also try to make sure that no one is trapped in a burning building.

FIRE SAFETY.

It is important to keep house fires from starting. Be sure there are no broken or damaged electrical cords around. There are several important tips to keep in mind:

(1) Put smoke detectors around the house, especially outside the bedrooms. A smoke detector alarm will wake you up if a fire starts while you are sleeping. If there is a fire, get out of the house quickly.

(2) If a fire starts, call 911. The sooner the firefighters get there, the sooner they can put out the fire. This might save houses and lives.

(3) Keep a fire extinguisher handy. If a fire starts, you can spray it before it gets out of control.

(4) Many schools and offices have sprinkler systems. A fire sets off the sprinklers. They spray water all around.

Microsoft ® Encarta ® 2009. © 1993-2008 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

Force and Motion.

You make forces all the time. Forces press on you, and you use them to press on objects. Pushing your foot against your bicycle pedal makes a force. The force sets the bike in motion. Every time something starts moving or stops moving, a force is responsible.

You use force to throw a ball in the air. The force of Earth’s gravity pulls the ball back down. Every step you take creates a force on your foot and on the ground. Forces and motion are part of everyday life.

EVERYTHING IS LAZY.

Why do you have to push a shopping cart to get it started? Objects that are sitting still stay that way until something makes them move. They have something called inertia. Inertia makes objects keep on doing whatever they are doing. Everything made of matter has inertia, even you!

If a shopping cart is standing still, inertia keeps it standing still. If the cart is moving, inertia keeps it moving. You have to apply a force to overcome inertia. The cart needs a push or pull to start moving down the grocery aisle. To stop the cart by your favorite cereal, you need to apply another force.

CHANGING SPEED AND TURNING.

Imagine that you’ve been shopping for a while and the store is about to close. You start pushing your shopping cart faster. You turn your cart when you head for a different aisle. Scientists call any change in motion acceleration. Acceleration can be a change in speed, direction, or both.

By now, your shopping cart is full. It’s a lot heavier than when you first started to push it. You have to push harder to get the cart moving. You have to push harder to make the cart go faster. Your cart needs more force because it has more mass or stuff in it. Scientists would tell you that the force needed to accelerate your cart or any other object by a given amount depends on the object’s mass (amount of matter). The more mass an object has, the more force you have to use to get it moving or slow it down.

PROBLEMS WITH FRICTION.

As if inertia and mass were not enough, you have to overcome friction to make objects move. Friction is also a force. Friction resists one object moving against another. Friction tries to keep your shopping-cart wheels from turning.

What if you had all your groceries in a big box? You would have to slide the box over the floor. Friction between the box and the floor comes from tiny bumps. The bumps on the box and the bumps on the floor get stuck against each other. You need force to move the bumps past each other. The rougher the floor the harder it is to slide the box. You could pour oil on the floor. Oil would lessen the friction. Oil would make the floor smooth and slippery. It would be easier to slide the box over the bumps on the floor.

Moving groceries in a cart with wheels is easier than sliding them in a box. There is still friction between the floor and the wheels. But it takes less force to roll the wheels over the floor.

A WORLD WITHOUT FRICTION.

What if there were no friction? Wouldn’t that make life easier?

Life would be impossible without friction. Friction makes your shoes stick to the floor. Without friction you would slip and fall and not be able to stand up. You wouldn’t be able to pick anything up either. Friction allows your hands to grip things. Cars wouldn’t be able to stop without friction. Lids would pop off of containers. Anything that moves would never stop moving without friction.

Microsoft ® Encarta ® 2009. © 1993-2008 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.
